I've been wanting to make this video for a while now in one form or another. And after pretty recently making a similar video for blueprints, I figured it was finally time to get to it. When you think of unsolved secrets in Noita, the first one that should immediately jump to mind is the eyes. So, I'm not going to waste your time. We're going to start right there. What are the eyes and what are the eyes not? These are the eyes. There are nine different sets of them. Five in the first east parallel world and four in the west. They spawn in specific locations depending on the world seed, but only if no mods are being used. Mods completely disable them from spawning, similar to another secret we're going to talk about shortly, and they remain entirely unsolved to this day. But that's not to say we don't know anything. We actually know quite a bit about them. We know where they can and can't spawn, how they spawn, that these images aren't present at all in the game's data, but that the engine itself generates them. We know the function that draws them on the screen. We know that there's nothing at all in the game's code that suggests they do anything or that we have to activate them in some way or that anything happens when they're solved. There's no evidence that points to them being some kind of Konami code or some kind of map. To the contrary, it's been confirmed by a developer when I asked them a while ago that >> for the eye decorations, I think I do dare say that I have confirmation that the eye decorations do contain a message. They are not uh just a bug or just a meaningless thing. They actually do have a meaning. So, in case that helps anyone in the community, >> they are an encrypted message. You might ask yourself, why doesn't the community just data mine the solution? The reason for that is very simple. There is no solution in the data to mine. This message, whether it was originally in English or Finnish or whatever language, was encoded into eyes before being added to the game. All the game does is draw these on the screen after you pass the mod check. That's it. They're an entirely data mineep proof cryptograph. So the way to tackle this is obviously through cryptography. Based on how each of the messages begins and ends, they were grouped into alternating up and down triagrams or sets of three. They very easily fit into this pattern. Each of these represents a base 5 number 000 to 444 which is then converted to base 10 which produces a range of 0 to 124. Out of 36 different standard orders to read them in only this one gives an unbroken range of base 10 numbers 0 to 82. What basically what this means is we know that this is the right way to read them because the chances of this happening randomly are so low that your cat has a higher chance of typing the entire dungeon crawler Carl series word for word on its first try. It also gives us these pretty patterns and shared sections. Okay, so we know how to read. What else? In every one of the nine messages, the first triagram is different and the second and third are the same. Does that mean that this could be a numbered list or a set of numbered instructions i.e. 1 do 2 3 dot etc? We're not sure yet, but potentially. Although across all these messages, no triagram is present twice in a row. So if each triagram did represent a single character, then the messages would maybe have to be written in a language other than English or especially Finnish where consecutive letters are much less common, something like Vietnamese or Spanish. We might actually know what kind of cipher is being used though. In the words of community member Lim, one of the most active astronauts, if there was a cipher where we had a deck of 83 cards, for each letter of the message, we shuffle those cards in a completely different way. draw the top card and then use the value on that card as the cipher text output for that letter. Then this method is able to reproduce all of the cryptographic properties the community has observed. Not a single other method has been found so far that can reproduce all of these. That's pretty exciting and it would make total sense in this game because wand building is pretty much deck building. Internally, the game even refers to its spells as cards. One of the main cryptographic properties and the reason why the community settled on this deck cipher idea has to do with those pretty patterns I mentioned a little while ago. These actually indicate patterns in the gaps between identical letters in each message. In cryptography, these are called isomorphs and they are a clear indicator that the same or similar words or phrases are being used in different places throughout the entire message. They also only form in certain encoding methods and it just so happens that the dex cipher limb described is one of the most general possible methods that can produce these. Isomorphs are also a big vulnerability in ciphers. So their presence here is a good thing and may eventually lead us to their solution which may end up looking something like this. Just kidding. That has way too many repeated letters. It still might be a numbered list though. However, despite all of this and the years of work people have put in, we still don't have enough information to solve them. And unfortunately, the current consensus is that we might actually need the devs to throw us a bone. But then again, there is another opinion out there that this is an intentionally unsolvable puzzle that the devs added to, in the words of Tander Ross of Blueprints, keep us from turning over every stone, ensuring at least one mystery remains in the game. Do I believe this? No. I don't believe the devs would be so cruel. They're all super cool guys. I don't think any of them would intentionally put a puzzle in the game that can't be solved. But that also doesn't mean that it was intentionally done. There is a possibility that it's just accidentally too difficult and without any further hints, no one is going to be able to solve it. So, I am going to reach out again to the devs to see if anything more can be said about it at this time. What do I hope the eyes end up being? Honestly, I'd be okay with almost anything except for a Rick roll. If they ended up being a recipe for how to cook something special to one of the developers, that'd be cool. I love cooking, and that's some good IRL lore. If they ended up being instructions for how to do something in the game so specific it's never been discovered, cool. With how complex all of the systems in Noita are, and I've been working on a video deep diving a few of these, there definitely could be some weird things hidden that we just haven't realized yet or that the majority haven't realized because we could end up solving them and the more knowledgeable in the community may already know the information that they tell us. It's a possibility that we have to consider. Some of us have been living in the deep end of Noita for a long time, but really, I don't personally think that it's going to end up being something we already know. I'm just considering that possibility. Or if they ended up leading us out of the game into an ARG that culminated in the discovery of the password to access the super secret private updated branch of the game. Because according to Steam DB, there is a private branch, a completely invisible password protected version of the game that may or may not be different than the version of the game accessible to the public. Now, back when 1.0 0 was first launching, a few of us had early access to stream, a private branch that did contain differences never available in any other branch. >> So now there's like the hall of wealth is like this new area made out of diamond diamond brick work. We always chocked that up to the devs trolling us for being content creators and getting us to spend all of our time trying to solve a non-existent puzzle during our pre-release streams. But who's to say this branch of the game never received more updates over the years, waiting for the community to solve Noita's biggest mystery in order to gain access to it? Again, something to consider. Anyway, that's all I have to say about the eyes for now. We know a lot about them. They are a message. The most significant recent discovery is that they might be a deck cipher, but they are still unsolved. If you'd like a simple way to find them in your world, Lim made Limb's telescope to help you do that. among other very useful things such as being able to look at every single wand in your world. I just wanted to give that a quick shout out. But for now, let's move on to the next mystery. >> On a scale to 1 to 10, how easy would you say the eye messages are to solve? Uh probably like uh square root of minus one. Uh I don't know at all. probably very difficult because the community hasn't managed to solve them even now. >
